MVer Foundation

Overall, the name for this new versioning and distribution system is Mver.

Thought of as software, for now when distributing Vista software such as 
George's work it is just a way of using KIDS, and when distributing Mash for 
now it is a way of using `%RO` and `%RI`.

To these it adds some libraries that can be used to calculate checksums, keys, 
and other very useful values for identifying the versions of M software.

Gradually, revision by revision, Mver will add datasets and supporting 
software to make it possible to:

1. precisely identify what's in an existing M habitat and whether it is 
caught up with the current edition and revision of the software in question,

2. calculate accurately the sequence of updates required to bring that habitat 
up to date,

3. perform those updates automatically in a controlled way, and

4. populate a shared dashboard that lets us simultaneously track the exact 
update status of an entire constellation of habitats, which we will need to 
inexpensively manage dozens of ScreeningPlus habitats around the world.

Each new version of Mash will take an incremental step in this direction.

To support that, in our practices, whether using KIDS or `%RO` or writing 
documentation or putting comments in our routines, we need to start shifting 
our mental models and terminology to match, so we can understand the changes 
we need to make, including why we need to make them, and easily translate back 
and forth between our old KIDS-based terminology and our new Mver terminology.

My goal is to make this as simple and painless as possible, with no 
unnecessary complications, because life is already too complicated and it 
doesn't need me stirring the pot any more than necessary.

I'm going to write about the basic ideas we need when we talk about versions 
of software. I'm going to show in each case how the old and present 
terminology causes big problems for us by conflating different things until 
we're unsure which one we mean, even where it is important to be sure. I'll 
show how our old keys and identifiers, such as patch IDs, magnify that 
confusion and create problems that can only be resolved manually, by having 
highly experienced and expensive professionals scratch their heads over the 
problem each and every time, blocking any chance at automation so long as we 
continue to use those old, confused terms and ideas.

This exploration of our status quo is not just to motivate us to change but 
also to raise our shared understanding of our real needs, until it is easy to 
see why we need the new terminology and ideas to let us create automated 
version-control software.

I'll break this up into bite-sized discussions, usually just two ideas and 
terms at a time, covering the old one's problems and how the new one makes 
those problems go away.

I'll space this discussion out one a day, so we have time to discuss and come 
to grips with each before we move on, to avoid getting overwhelmed. In each 
case, understanding the problem and solution in each pair of terms takes work 
on our part; it challenges our existing comfortable (but confused) habits of 
thought with a breath of (sometimes unwelcome) fresh air. I speak from 
experience. Each big step forward Ken and I took toward Mver over the past 
seven years came with difficulty, after getting it wrong for years and being 
plagued by the resulting problems before figuring out we ourselves were 
causing those very problems.

I hope in this way to spare you what Ken and I went through, to make it easy 
and quick for you to understand Mver and how to use it to manage our improving 
ScreeningPlus software lifecycle, to make it faster and easier to release 
updates.

**Mver 1: Package, Application, & App**

*Intro to Packages*
The center of VA's existing software lifecycle, more central even than KIDS, 
is the Package file (9.4), which lists all of Vista's packages. Packages are 
Vista's main way of dividing up the whole of Vista into manageable pieces, 
pieces small enough that each one can be assigned to a single development team 
to manage that part of Vista.

Each package contains all the routines, globals, and other pieces that make up 
that package. We usually refer to these pieces of a package as package 
elements. Each entry in Vista's Package file describes the package and lists 
all of its package elements, or at least is supposed to. That's why this file 
was created long, long ago.

This is one of Vista's hub files, like the Patient file or New Person file. 
That means many other files point to the Package file and otherwise depend on 
it, and many other ideas and terms throughout Vista code, data, and 
documentation are derived from the idea of a package.

*Intro to Applications*
Throughout the tens of thousands of routines and documents created in the 
Vista world over the past half century, the term *application* has been used 
as a synonym of the word package as described above. There is no "Application 
file" in Vista; the Package file records all applications. Having application 
be a synonym for package in this way does not cause any problem; English 
speakers are well familiar with having choices of synonyms to pick from.

*Intro to Apps*
Apple introduced the term app to mean an application designed to be run on an 
iPhone. From there it spread to mean an application designed to be run on any 
smart phone, on a tablet, or on the web, and eventually its meaning has spread 
to also be used as a synonym for application generally (though a shrinking 
number of people sometimes still distinguish smart-phone apps from general 
apps).

For our purposes, app makes another fine synonym for package and application. 
It's shorter and was not already used for anything else. It is convenient when 
discussing version-control software, where we need to refer over and over and 
over to packages. In general, good language idiom uses short words for the 
ideas we need to say the most often, and saves longer words for the ideas we 
say less often. As software and its ideas have grown from being obscure things 
only encountered by professionals to becoming part of everyone's everyday 
life, it makes sense that our term for it would start out as the 
four-syllable, twelve-letter application before eventually shrinking to the 
one-syllable, three-letter app.

So far, no problem.

*Packaging Apps Before KIDS*
A related but very different idea from an app concerns how the software for 
that app is distributed, which requires packaging up its elements from the 
source system so they can be installed on many target systems.

Before KIDS was introduced in 1995, this was always done in two steps.

First, all package elements that were not routines (that is, all package data, 
info stored in a package's globals) were converted into routines, called init 
routines. If run on the target system, those init routines would recreate 
those data elements there. A Fileman module called `DIFROM` (`DI` being 
Fileman's main prefix, `FROM` meaning we're packaging up our data to send from 
me to you) was run on the source system. It asked the user to select the data 
elements to move, and then it created the set of init routines that the target 
systems could run to recreate those elements there. Back then, every version 
of a package shipped not just the routines that normally run in that package 
but also its set of init routines to be run once, when upgrading to that 
version of the package.

The main problem left for distribution, then, was how to get all those 
routines from the source system to the target system.

So second, all those routines would be packaged up in one of two ways.

The old way was to use `%RO` to write the routines out to a data file on a 
9-track magnetic tape. Copies of those tapes were made, one for each target 
site. In VA, those were packaged up and physically mailed to each VA hospital, 
where they were loaded onto each computer and installed in each habitat. In 
IHS, they were often loaded into the back of pickup trucks that drove out to 
reservations across the country to be installed one by one at each site, 
necessitated partly by uncertain mail delivery on reservations, partly by a 
lack of trained installers at many of the smaller IHS sites.

Tom Munnecke helped VA set up its nationwide intranet way back when, and he 
wrote Mailman, so he was eager to upgrade VA's software distribution system. 
He wrote Packman, a module of Mailman, that could package up a set of routines 
in a source habitat and convert them into an email message, which could then 
be sent to every VA site in the country faster and more cheaply than the 
physical-tape method.

Because of severe disk space limitations, this new method was not used for new 
editions of the software, only for incremental revisions, what VA has for 
decades called patches. So for a while VA adopted a hybrid system, using 
physical tapes for new editions (e.g., Fileman version 21) and e-mail messages 
for revisions (e.g., Fileman 21 patch 4).

After a wave of hard-drive capacity upgrades across the country, VA improved 
its software-distribution system further by replacing physical tapes with 
direct system-to-system `ftp` transfers. The source habitat would set up a VMS 
site to act as an ftp server and load its new edition there, in the form of a 
`.RO` file (e.g., `FILEMAN-21.RO`), and sysadmins at the target sites would 
ftp over to pull down the new edition, thus eliminating the need for tapes 
entirely.

IHS eventually followed suit.

This was the state of affairs, more or less in 1995.

So on the one hand we had Packages or Applications (or Apps later), and on the 
other hand we had tapes or Packman messages or `.RO` files ftped from place to 
place. There was no special confusion of terminology, despite the variety of 
distribution mechanisms. Either a `.RO ` file was sent, by tape or ftp, or 
else a Packman message was emailed, bypassing the need for a `.RO` file. 
Either way loading the resulting e-mail message or `.RO` file resulted in the 
routines being loaded into the target habitat, and running the init routines 
recreated the new data structures (and/or converted existing ones).

As yet we had no general term for the package of goodies containing the new 
version, just specific terms depending on which distribution method was used.

*Enter KIDS*
On July 10, 1995, KIDS was released for the first time, introduced as part of 
Kernel version 8, and Kernel itself was the first Vista package to be 
distributed mainly by KIDS.

The development of KIDS had been a joint venture between the Kernel (KIDS), 
Fileman (DIFROM), and Mailman (Packman) teams, with the goal of a new 
generation of Vista software distribution that could make it possible to avoid 
two problems with the old system.

First, in the old system, the only way to really inspect the new incoming 
routines was to load them into an M habitat, which necessarily overwrote the 
habitat's existing versions. If you decided it was a mistake and you didn't 
actually want to install the new routines, you found out too late. So we were 
in the habit of first loading new versions somewhere disposable, and then 
comparing the results with our main habitats to decide if we wanted to proceed.

KIDS introduced the concept of a loading dock, which it calls the "transport 
global," which is scratch space in a new global, `^XTMP`, where the incoming 
software is loaded instead of being dumped directly on top your habitat's 
existing routine directory. Thus, all your new incoming routines, globals, and 
everything else can be loaded into a habitat without being applied to it, 
giving sysadmins the time they need to evaluate whether they want to proceed.

This idea was borrowed directly from Mailman's Packman module, since, in 
effect, the old Packman e-mail message acted as a similar loading dock. We 
could read the message and study its contents before deciding whether to apply 
it. KIDS just shifted the loading dock from the Message file to `^XTMP`, and 
added a suite of tools to help with the comparisons.

Second, M routines have always had strict size limits, but the size of Vista 
data we wanted to be able to transport was growing and quickly outpaced those 
limits. DIFROM had responded by splitting data across multiple init routines, 
but data-heavy packages were starting to need to transport hundreds or even 
thousands of init routines just to move their data around. It was awkward, and 
it was running up against M portability limits for sizes of routines and 
length of unique routine names.

So KIDS used ideas from Packman to turn our old DIFROM system of distribution 
inside out.

Instead of the old DIFROM method of turning everything into routines so only 
routines had to be distributed, KIDS exploited the Packman method of turning 
routines into global data, so only global data had to be exploited. Where 
Packman messages package up a set of routines, including the inits, into data, 
KIDS cuts out the middle man. No longer did we need to first use `DIFROM` to 
convert all our data into routines. KIDS used pretty much the same dialog as 
`DIFROM` but instead of generating init routines it added that data to its 
growing transport global, and also added the package's actual routines 
alongside that data, creating a package of data to be transported. Once this 
package was shipped one way or another to the target sites, that package could 
be loaded into each target habitat's loading dock, analyzed, and when deemed 
appropriate it could be installed, recreating the source habitat's data and 
its routines in the target habitat.

Together, these two changes KIDS introduced made for a more flexible, powerful 
framework for Vista software distribution.

It just required a conceptual change from a distribution being a suite of 
routines to instead being a package of goodies (package elements) that 
included both data and routines.

*Kids & Packages*
The obvious term for this package of goodies was a package, because Mailman's 
Packman module was already using the verb to package in its own name as well 
as in its operational terminology. From Mailman's standpoint, it was packaging 
up routines into an e-mail message, but from KIDS's standpoint it made better 
sense to think of it as packaging things up into a package, which in turn 
could be distributed either as a `.KID` file (replacing the old `.RO` method) 
or as an e-mail message (extending the old Packman format into a more powerful 
KIDS format).

So now package meant both the package of goodies you ship around for 
distribution and it also still meant the app itself for which you need to ship 
a new version. There was no clear way to disambiguate whether you were talking 
about a suite of software or an update to that suite; the word package was 
used for both.

*Disambiguating Apps from Packages*
Some VA documenters and teachers (such as myself) noticed this problem and 
started pushing us to abandon the use of the word package as a synonym for 
app. We felt we should only refer to apps as apps (or applications, never as 
packages), and that would free up the term package to be used for the packages 
of goodies we ship from place to place.

*Where That Leaves Vista*
Vista documentation and code and UI all remain hopelessly confused about this, 
because the need to make this change became clear just as VA began sabotaging 
Vista development, making widespread changes to code, documentation, and 
shared terminology increasingly difficult and eventually impossible. VA and 
Vista thus remain stuck.

The Vista Package file, under this new schema does not describe packages. It 
only describes apps, although it also includes a general accounting of various 
editions and revisions that have been applied for each app.

KIDS's Install file also does not describe packages. It describes when 
packages were installed in the current habitat. It is pretty good about which 
apps were updated and when and how, but it is unfortunately vague about 
precisely which package was being installed to introduce those updates.

KIDS's Build file also does not describe packages. It describes the recipes 
used to create those packages. But because it uses version IDs as its main 
database key, not package IDs, every time you install a newer build for a 
package, KIDS overwrites the old build recipe with the new one, thus erasing 
your history of what you earlier installed. This can make it tough to work out 
precisely which builds were installed where and when.

At the heart of this confusion is that Vista has no file anywhere that 
documents actual packages, in this newer KIDS sense of the word. There is no 
permanent record of the packages have been created from or installed into the 
current habitat, only nearby concepts like apps, installs, and "builds" 
(recipes).

As we will see in the days ahead, over half of the problems with Vista's 
versioning system stem directly from this confusion. We don't permanently 
track KIDS packages, and we don't even have an unambiguous way to refer to 
them generally or identify them individually. Every hack used to date to work 
around this gap has caused as many problems as it has solved.

*Mver, Apps, & Packages*
But the first part of solving a problem is to understand that we have a 
problem.

Using package and application as synonyms has bred a rat's nest of 
version-control problems.

The first step in Mver's migration out of this Gordian knot of problems is 
that in Mver:

1. App (or Application when we're being formal) always and only refers to the 
complete suite of software that makes up a part of Vista. The elements of a 
single app are managed together mostly independently from the elements of 
different apps, and usually by a single, coherent team of developers who 
manage it for a long time to ensure stability and continuity in the app's 
development.

2. Package always and only refers to a package of goodies distributed to 
install or upgrade an app, that is, to install a new version of that app. 
Coming up with workable version IDs will be among the challenges addressed in 
later discussions, but more centrally packages themselves will also need their 
own unique IDs, to remove all the confusion about which one we mean.

3. Ergo, Vista's "Package" file (9.4), despite its name, is actually an App 
file. At present Vista has no true Package file. New Mver datasets need to be 
introduced to permanently track every package that has been distributed from 
or installed into each habitat, and software needs to be created and updated 
to automate this tracking.

4. Likewise, whenever we're reading KIDS documentation, UI elements, or 
comments in routines, and whenever we're talking with VA and IHS Vista folks, 
every single time they say the word "package" a red flag needs to go up in our 
minds to remind us to double-check which kind of package they're referring to, 
an app or a distribution—and especially to notice when they or we are confused 
about which they or we mean, which happens too often for comfort.

Effectively, we're going to learn to be proficient with two different dialects 
here, the new Mver terminology and concepts for version control, and the old 
KIDS/Patch Module terminology and concepts.

The new terminology is a superset of the old one; every idea that can be clearly expressed in the KIDS/Patch Module terminology can also be clearly expressed in Mver.

But the old terminology is only a subset of the new one; there are many important ideas that can be clearly expressed in Mver that are difficult to think about clearly using KIDS/Patch Module.

By becoming bilingual in this way, we can not only move into a better lifecycle for ScreeningPlus, but we can also de-confuse situations involving KIDS, Patch Module, and people who think in their terms. This is going to be enormously helpful gong forward.

But it all starts with disambiguating app and package as described above for our first step.

Here endeth my intro to this first step today.

Feel free to share any questions, comments, or concerns you have about it, so we can discuss them together.

